= To Do

== Bugs

None known, though many are assumed to exist. Please send bug reports to
mailto:jim@jimmenard.com.

== New Features

* Screen shot?

* Windows observe contents to minimize redraws. Perhaps only need to observe
  PatchMaster itself?

* Scrolling in windows. See newpad.

* Display instruments?

* Alternate display that only shows song and patch names and little else?
  This might be useful during performance. Already have console-only
  version.

* Console version: output song and patch name whenever switch is made and in
  console mode.

* Do I need to handle running bytes in Connection#midi_in, or does UniMIDI
  take care of that?

* Fix PromptWindow display cleanup.

* Help screen.

* More documentation.

* Handle window resizing (SIGWINCH). How do I get new screen size?

* Trap signals like ^C. Don't do work, just set flag to be handled next time
  through loop.

* Remember playing notes. When move from patch to patch, make sure to send
  corresponding note-off messages to the original outputs on the original
  channels. Add 2-dimensional arrays to output instrument: channel and note
  number. If entry is non-nil then note is playing.

* "Are you sure?" on quit? --- but I hate that.

* Programmable MIDI messages: predefined keys that send blocks of MIDI data

* See list of features at http://jimmenard.com/projects/keymaster/, but note
  that many of those can be implemented via triggers and filters

* Fill-in-the-blank messages, useful for things like sysex for displaying
  song and patch name. This could get sent out whenever patch changes, and
  could be used to display song/patch in a synth's display, for example.
